Diagnostic tests study credibility.
So recall these were prospective observational cross-sectional studies, and the kind of
the design features that we want to kind of be mindful of are, was the diagnostic test
compared to a gold standard?
So recall also that everyone in...
So there's a study to assess some new tests.
We call that the index test.
So everyone in that study to assess this new test undergoes the index test and gets a result,
you know, what the test said, and undergoes the gold standard.
So at the end of this, once everybody has undergone both of those tests,
the investigators can have a way of knowing what the true status of each person is, right?
So they can create those two-by-two tables.
And so there has to be a credible gold standard.
And, you know, what you'll see in a lot of these sort of physical orthopedic kind of tests,
the gold standard might be surgical observation.
You know, they'll do the test before the person goes into surgery.
The surgeon, you know, once he's in there, can say yay or nay, and this condition exists,
or might be compared to MRI, things like that.
So there's normally some kind of gold standard.
And then did all subjects undergo the comparison test?
That's, you know, was there a credible gold standard?
And then did they all undergo it?
And then were the people doing testing or performing the index test, were they blinded?
Were they masked to whether or not the person actually has the condition or not?
Because, you know, that would be a potential input for bias.
So is there a credible gold standard?
Did everyone undergo that comparison or gold standard tests?
And ideally, we want the people performing the index test to have been blinded
to whether or not the person actually had the condition or not.
So those are the three big ones.
And most of the ones you see published would meet these criteria.
But some journals are not that, there's some journals that aren't that good out there
aren't indexed in PubMed, but you could still kind of could show up in a search.
And it's definitely worth interrogating that.
And then the other two were, were subjects inclusive of all levels of a condition?
So this has to do with conditions that normally have some kind of progressive nature,
you know, like Parkinson's disease, you know, hole in your one, two, three, whatever.
You know, there might be different reasons not to include everyone or to include everyone.
And then we're finding is confirmed in a new set of subjects.
That's replication.
That's the ideal scenario of it, that the study is replicated and the results are similar.
That's something that's being emphasized now by NIH to start funding more replication studies.
But unfortunately, we don't see that very often.
So it's really the first three that we want to really be on the lookout for.
So just in summary, just know measures of test performance are determined
by these pretty straightforward calculations based on sensitivity and specificity.
And they allow us to critically assess the value of the diagnostic test.
And that's applicable to our particular practice scenario.
