Okay, diagnostic tests, receiver operating characteristics occurs.
So as we ended in that last section, these are used when the test produces a continuous
result like a timed up and go score or a bird balance test, and we want to identify
a threshold on that continuum of scores that best differentiates patients, usually by some
condition, and often that's thing for us, that's things like increased risk of some outcome
like falls or readmission, but it could be anything.
So receiver operating characteristics curve produce a plot of the false positive rate on
the x-axis versus the true positive rate on the y-axis.
So it's one minus specificity on the x-axis and sensitivity on the y-axis, essentially,
for a number of different candidate threshold values between 0 and 1.
They also produced this number called an area under the curve, or the AUC, and it just basically
measures the total area underneath the ROC curve, and it tells us how much the model
is capable of distinguishing between classes, and so a higher AUC means it's a better model.
We'll look at some examples here.
So these are kind of characteristic example, receiver operating characteristics curves with
some different potential scenarios.
So this one here on the upper left, it shows, you know, there's a straight line coming up
from 0, gets close to 1, then it takes a hard right, and so that's a perfect classification.
In the one, in the figure on the right side of the page, you know, it would be more kind
of realistically what it would look like, so basically these curves are created from all
the scores on the continuous measures from all the subjects in the study, just kind
of connected together and made to look like a smooth line.
So if you have a scenario like in this left-hand figure where you have this, you know, the
peak of the curve comes way up and to the left, you have so, so this is a, this is a
value on the curve, let's say, you know, this top left point.
Here you have a scenario with high sensitivity and very low false positive rate, which is
good.
So you have basically a high sensitivity, high specificity test.
That's the ideal scenario.
You know, high true positive rate, very low false positive rate.
Fortunately, that's not usually the way it goes, but then you see, so still on this kind
of straight curve here, it goes all the way up and to the left, it has the most area,
you know, underneath its outline that's going to have the highest AUC.
This, this curve here, it has much less area underneath the, its, you know, kind of outline.
And so it's going to have a lower AUC and it suggests that this measure isn't as good as
the measure reflected in that one that went to the upper left corner.
And so here we have a scenario.
If we tried to pick a number pretty similar, we would see a low sensitivity, a low true
positive rate and still a relatively high, relatively low false positive rate, but our
sensitivity is much lower.
So this is, this is just kind of the breakdown of, you know, what you'll see in these
curves.
Well, let's look at a specific example and kind of dig in a little bit deeper.
So this is a study we did a long time ago now up on the ACE unit here in the hospital.
And it was the type that was published in PT journal, it was the walking speed threshold
for classifying walking independence and hospitalized older adults.
And we went out to determine if the in hospital walking speed threshold that bests differentiate
walking independence from walking dependence in older adults.
So basically we measured the gate speed of about 160 something older hospitalized adults.
And then we wanted to, then we also asked them if they were walking independent or
walking dependent, if they need to help to walk or not.
And so we had a gate speed, a continuous gate speed measure for all these people.
And then this dichotomous classification, walking independent, walking dependent, that we also
had from each one of these patients.
And so we wanted to determine what walking speed best differentiates between those who
are walking, who report walking independence versus walking dependence.
And to do that, you use this receiver operating characteristics curves method.
And this is the curve that's in the paper.
And so we can see here that this line, this represents all the gate speeds from all 160
something people, but it's just kind of smoothed out, their speeds are connected.
So someone down here on the far left end of the curve, these are the fastest walkers.
So this might be, you know, 1.0 meters per second.
This person here at this point on the curve.
Way down here on the right end of this curve, these are the slowest.
This might be 0.1 meters per second gate speed.
And so what this analysis method does is that it calculates what point on this curve
is closest to this upper left-hand corner, which you remember is suggestive of kind of
the best possible scenario.
In the attempt of identifying a threshold that seems to be best at differentiating people
on their self-reported walking independence based on their gate speed, what's kind of
going on under the hood here is that it's calculating a sensitivity and specificity.
It's creating a two by two table for every one of these scores.
Every one of these 160 something people scores.
And when you kind of start looking at that threshold value, so this is a breakdown of
just sort of a range around that 0.36 that the computer identified.
This is called the closest to one method.
It'll actually just do that for you.
So here we see, so our goal is to identify a threshold.
What's the best threshold?
And this kind of gets into the investigators just kind of judgment and kind of expertise
in the area, too.
It's not all math.
So what this is saying is, so this is the, we picked a threshold of about 0.35, 0.36
meters per second as the gate speed that best differentiates people based on their self-reported
independence, walking independence status.
So what this is saying, 0.36 meters per second that has a sensitivity of about 0.7 and a one
minus specificity of about 0.24 or something like that, or yeah.
And so, and then we look down here, and so remember one minus specificity, so we subtract,
this is the false positive rate, so the actual specificity would be 70 something, 70%.
So we picked this value because it just is the first study like this that was done.
It's kind of a trade-off between sensitivity and specificity.
But if we were to choose a much slower gate speed as our threshold, say 0.25 meters per
second, like down here, that's going to give us a much higher sensitivity, sensitivity of
like 90%, but the trade-off is we're going to have a also quite a bit higher false positive
rate.
So we're going to correct, we're going to more, we're going to identify more people who
are walking independent by using a slower gate speed, but the price is that we're going
to be misclassifying some people as walking independent when they're really not.
Okay, and so that is the trade-off often on these ROC curves is that when you increase
sensitivity, you increase the true positive rate, you're also going to increase the false
positive rate.
So it's a trade-off, and sometimes you just kind of have to decide what's more
important, correctly identifying someone with the condition or, you know, is it more
important to identify everyone with the condition than it is to potentially misclassify
somebody as having it when they don't.
And that's the trade-off that these, that we have to come to terms with.
And sometimes it's based on, you know, clinical factors like importance of misclassification,
things like that.
So that's kind of the tricky part on understanding these ROC curves and identifying a
threshold is that it's, you know, normally as you increase, if you choose a score that
increases your true positive rate, you're also probably increasing your false positive
rate as well.
So it's that trade-off that you kind of have to come to terms with.
And so, you know, for this study, you know, we, you know, the kind of clinical goals that
now that there's a, there's a threshold for creating a discharge goal per se.
So the patient will ambulate at greater than 0.35 meters per second with or without
an assisted device by discharge.
And you can kind of put in parentheses that the cut point for walking independence in
hospital.
And so lastly, we're going to talk just about some important kind of design features for
assessing the credibility of a diagnostic test.
