Okay, diagnostic tests 3, SNOUT and SPIN.
So SNOUT and SPIN are two acronyms that, two concepts that like to show up on things like
board exams because it's very common little acronyms or mnemonics in medicine.
So SNOUT stands for if sensitivity is high, a negative test will rule out the disorder
and SPIN stands for if specificity is high, a positive test will rule the disorder in.
So basically, SNOUT, if sensitivity is high, a negative test will rule out the disorder.
And that is kind of, and the reason that is, it's kind of counterintuitive, you know, so
but remember, sensitivity is only calculated on those participants in the study who have
the condition, right?
It doesn't know anything about the people who don't have the condition.
It's only calculated on those people who have the condition.
And SNOUT is if sensitivity is high, a negative test will rule out the disorder.
You might kind of think, well, a positive test is what you want, right?
I mean, but in terms of clinical decision making, this is actually more credible rule
for making decisions, and we'll talk about why.
So if sensitivity is high, a negative test will rule out the disorder.
And this figure shows why that is.
So here we have a graphic of a hypothetical test with high sensitivity and just kind of
middling specificity.
So if you, you know, if you conduct a test on a patient and the test comes back negative,
from this figure, we see that there are very few false negatives, right?
Very few false negatives.
But if the test comes back positive, it's got a fairly high false positive rate.
60% of the positives are false positive.
So when you have a statistical test and the published sensitivity and specificity is such
that it's got really high sensitivity, kind of mediocre specificity, and that'll normally
be the case one way or the other.
You'll rarely have a physical test that has high on both sensitivity and specificity.
And we'll talk about, you know, the kind of trade-off between those two when we get
into ROC curves, but for just thinking about sensitivity and specificity of a dichotomous
test like, you know, like the Romberg, it's positive or it's negative, a test with high
sensitivity is going to have very few false negatives.
So if you get a negative on a test with high sensitivity, it's in mediocre specificity,
you can take that negative test to the bank because there are very few false negatives.
So here's this kind of very characteristic sort of case where there's this uroscreen,
this is a medical example, but it's applicable.
Uroscreen is a rapid diagnostic test for the early detection of urinary tract infection.
Sensitivity and specificity is 100% and 68% respectively.
So it's got sensitivity of 100%, specificity of 68% and children presenting with symptoms
of UTI.
So young girls develop symptoms suggestive of UTI is tested with the uroscreen and the
test comes back positive.
Okay, so here we have a test with high sensitivity, mediocre specificity and the test comes back
positive.
Does this mean she has a UTI?
So think about it before we talk about the answer.
High sensitivity, mediocre specificity, the test came back positive.
Does that mean she has the UTI?
And the answer is maybe, maybe not.
So with 100% sensitivity, the test will detect virtually everyone with a UTI, but it's relatively
low specificity means it will be falsely positive for quite a few children.
So if you get a positive, it might be a false, there's a pretty good chance it's a false positive.
And this is a snout example.
Sensitivity is high, a negative test will rule out the disorder, but it doesn't tell
you much about a positive test.
So spin, if specificity is high, a positive test will rule in the disorder.
And this figure shows why that is.
So when we're talking about specificity, we're only talking, it was calculated on only those
people who do not have the condition.
So if you get a positive test on a test with high specificity, there are very few
false positives.
So you can pretty much take it to the bank.
So here's another case.
Sensitivity and specificity of this dip strict test in diagnosing UTI and hospitalized in
patients is 27% sensitivity, 94% specificity.
Sensitivity is kind of low, specificity is high.
Person presents with symptoms suggestive of the UTI test negative.
Does that mean he does not have a UTI?
So we have really high specificity, 94% specificity, 27% sensitivity.
The test comes back negative.
Does that mean he has a UTI?
Think about it.
You can't really tell.
That's because he might have a UTI, but the test lack of sensitivity might have led to
a false negative result.
What if he had tested positive?
Okay, this is SPIN.
Because so many people without the condition test negative, you've got a really high specificity.
You have very few false positives.
So if you get a positive test, you can kind of take it to the bank.
So that's most helpful.
So think about these two concepts, and if you can get to where you can sort of correctly
turn these over in your head and apply them to simple case scenarios like this, you've
got the lion's share of this sort of understanding diagnostic tests.
This is a really good figure to kind of meditate on.
It really covers everything we just went over.
Just graphically, it shows you the low sensitivity, high specificity scenario, the high sensitivity,
low specificity scenario, and then that scenario that we rarely see in the real clinical world,
high sensitivity, high specificity, and kind of gives you what is kind of most useful to
the clinician in terms of outcome and making a decision.
So I highly recommend spending some time with this figure until you feel pretty comfortable
with how these different scenarios play out with a test result in a clinical case.
This is just, again, that sort of ideal situation, but we rarely see this.
Okay, next we're going to talk about likelihood ratios.
Likelihood ratios are really the most useful of these metrics clinically, and we'll talk
about why, but they're derived from sensitivity and specificity, and they're really designed
for clinical decision making, and when a test that we use has published likelihood ratios,
that's what you'll kind of default to, not just this plain sensitivity and specificity,
but the likelihood ratios, because they're kind of built around the clinical decision making.
