So diagnostic tests to sensitivity and specificity.
So we ended the last section recognizing that the 2x2 table is the engine behind almost
every diagnostic accuracy measure.
From it, we're going to calculate sensitivity and specificity, which are the core concepts.
And then from sensitivity and specificity, we'll calculate likelihood ratios and receiver
operating characteristics curves.
So the definitions of sensitivity and specificity is just really straightforward.
So sensitivity is a test's ability to correctly identify people who really have the condition
as positive.
Specificity is a test's ability to correctly identify people who really do not have the
condition as negative.
So basically, sensitivity, you just divide the people with the condition, who tests positive,
divided by all the people with the condition.
So recall from the way these studies are conducted that you have a sample of people who are clinically
potentially able to have the condition under study.
Some of them do, some of them don't.
Everyone in that sample is going to get the index test, which is the test being studied.
Everyone is going to get a gold standard, which is some already established way of identifying
whether the person really has it or really does not.
And then once the study, and then once they, you know, everybody undergoes both of those
tests, the investigators will sit down with the data and they'll divide people into those
who really have the condition because we have this gold standard as part of the design.
We'll divide the people that we know really have the condition from those who really
don't have the condition.
And when we're talking about sensitivity, we're only looking at people who have the condition,
who we know has the condition, and then we're going to see what's the number of people
who tested positive with that index test and what were the number of people who tested
negative with that index test.
The people who test positive with the test under study, those are true positives because
we know they really have it.
When we're talking about sensitivity, we're only talking about people who have the condition.
If someone tests negative with this index test, that's a false negative because, again,
we're only looking at the people who actually have the condition.
And so in regard to sensitivity, the two options for the test result is a true positive
or a false negative.
So here's this little hypothetical study with 10 people who actually have the condition in
this study.
They had, you know, 10 really do have it.
And so the index test, eight of them tested positive with this new test under study, two
of them tested negative.
So the eight are the true positives because they really have it, you know.
The two that tested negative are false negatives because they really have it.
The test is wrong.
And sensitivity, very simply, is just 8 divided by 10, 0.8 or 80%.
That's straightforward.
Specificity is now looking at those people who do not have the condition.
So it's the proportion of people without the condition who will have a negative test, the
true negatives.
So specificity is the number of patients without the condition who test negative divided by
the number of patients without the condition.
Just like sensitivity, it ranges from 0 to 100%.
And so in this case, in this study, we have, there were 90 people in the total sample
that did not have the condition.
The index test said 85 of those 90 was negative, it came back negative.
That's correct.
Those are true negatives because they don't have it.
It came back as saying it was positive on 5 of that 90 without the condition.
So that's a false positive.
Specificity is now just 85 divided by 90, 94%.
The fraction of subjects without the condition will get a negative test result.
So that is pretty straightforward math, pretty straightforward concepts.
But now we're going to talk about, or next we're going to talk about this kind of how
to use that in clinical decision making sort of based on the results of the test in the
context of that test's sensitivity and specificity.
