So appraising the evidence, diagnostic tests.
So when we diagnose, we're not reacting to one isolated finding where we're combining
history, patient history, symptoms, physical exam, and test data to decide which explanation
fits best.
And that matters because any individual clue can mislead us.
The special test becomes meaningful when it's interpreted in the context of the rest of this
larger patient story.
So as we start talking about diagnostic tests, we have to kind of keep that bigger picture in
mind that the value of a diagnostic test is in how much it improves our ability to sort
these competing clues and land on the right diagnosis.
So for this series, for this module, we're going to be talking just briefly about the
research design used in the evaluation of diagnostic tests and then spend most of the
time on interpreting findings from these diagnostic studies.
Sensitivity and specificity, likelihood ratios, and ROC curves, and they're all related.
And then spend just a short time talking about assessing the credibility of diagnostic studies.
So when a study focuses on a diagnostic test, what's going on is usually someone has
developed some new test and they want to know whether this new test is good enough.
And the new test is usually cheaper, quicker, kind of more convenient in the clinic,
something like that.
So the main question is how good is this new test at correctly classifying patients with respect to
having or not having the target condition, right?
And so what these studies do is they establish the accuracy in doing just that.
So the best study design for doing this, the cleanest design for an accuracy study follows this little
sequence. We start with a relevant clinical population, and these are people who are
actually suspected of having the condition, then give all included participants the index test.
And the index test is the test that's being evaluated.
Next, to give them all the reference standard, and the reference standard is the sort of the
current best available method for determining their true status.
This is the kind of gold standard that you'll see mentioned in these studies.
And then they'll compare the classifications between the index test and the gold standard,
and ideally with blinded interpretation.
So the people doing the tests under study do not know if the person has the condition or not,
so they're not influenced by anything.
So when we read a paper on kind of the accuracy of a test, we do not start with the sensitivity.
We start by asking whether the study design gives that sensitivity any chance of being
trustworthy. And these studies are always prospective.
You know, they're not a retrospective study. They don't work on an existing data set.
They're usually cross-sectional, because that means they're not testing the same information,
getting the same information to multiple instances across time. They're usually cross-sectional
studies. They have a blinded interpretation. That's what I mentioned.
The person doing the assessment doesn't really know the person's true status.
And then it's compared with that gold standard.
The index test findings are compared with the gold standard.
So once both of these tests are done, that's, you know, the index and the gold standard,
every participant lands in one of four of these cells in this two-by-two table.
A true positive has the condition, and the test and tests positive.
A false positive does not have the condition, but still tests positive.
A false negative does have the condition, but tests negative, and a true negative does
not have the condition and tests negative. And, you know, this table looks pretty simple,
but it really is the engine behind almost every diagnostic study, accuracy measure.
And when we, if you kind of internalize, just really understand this table,
when we start applying these, applying it to clinical scenarios,
everything just gets a lot easier.
Okay, so next we're going to kind of dive into, you know, kind of the foundational idea
underneath these diagnostic studies, and that is derived from these two-by-two tables,
and that's sensitivity and specificity.
