Okay, diagnostic tests, likelihood ratios.
So likelihood ratios are really kind of a special kind of test metric that almost have
kind of a magical component to it.
It's really not magic.
We'll see what's going on, but it kind of feels that way at first glance sometimes.
So likelihood ratios can be used to estimate how the probability of the condition changes
from a pre-test probability to the post-test probability after the test results are known.
And that kind of has to do with just that sort of general scenario for considering a diagnostic
test.
So when a patient presents in the clinic, you'll have scenarios where you see the chart, you
see the referral, you see the person, you have a brief conversation with them, it's
very clear what's going on.
In those circumstances, when your sort of pre-test probability of what you think the
condition is is super high, you don't need to do a test.
And conversely, you know, there are certainly conditions where you wouldn't consider performing
a special test for in that particular case because there's no real indication for that
disease.
There's a very low probability, super, super low probability that they have one condition
or another.
And in those circumstances, you don't need to test either because it's just a super, super
low probability.
It's in that much, much wider center area that we conduct a test to kind of rule in
or rule out our initial suspicion.
And so as we're sitting there looking at that patient, you know, there's some suggestion
of a particular diagnosis and it's not completely clear.
You have a kind of a pre-test, you have, you know, before you do a diagnostic test,
you have an idea of what the condition is that's slightly present and the likelihood
of it being there.
That's when you do a test, that's the scenario when you do a diagnostic test.
And then you get the results of that test after you do it and then you make a decision.
So sensitivity and specificity can be combined into this measure called a likelihood ratio.
And it just tells us how much more likely it is that a person has the diagnosis that
we have in mind that we're conducting this test for after the test is done.
That's kind of the magical, kind of seemingly piece part of it.
And there, when you, you know, you see a paper that has a published likelihood ratio,
it'll give you an LR positive and an LR negative along with the sensitivity and specificity.
And the LR positive is just how much more likely a positive test is in someone with
the condition and in someone without it.
And the LR negative is how much more likely a negative test is in someone with the condition
than someone without it.
There, it's kind of another pretty straightforward calculation.
LR positive is just the sensitivity of the test divided by 1 minus specificity.
So you're dividing sensitivity, you're dividing the true positive rate by, which is sensitivity,
by the false positive rate, which is essentially 1 minus specificity.
And these will usually have values greater than 1.
This is just a little scenario.
Sensitivity is 80 percent, specificity is 94 percent.
So LR positive is just sensitivity, which is the true positive rate divided by 1 minus specificity,
which is the false positive rate, which comes out to 13.3.
So here, the LR positive is 13.3.
And so it means that a positive test is more likely to occur with people, in people with
the condition, than people without the condition.
We can look at negative likelihood ratios are very similar.
So we have the LR negative is just 1 minus sensitivity, which is the false negative
rate divided by specificity.
And these will have values less than 1.
So here we have 80 percent sensitivity, 94 percent specificity, the LR negative is just 1 divided
by 0.8, which is now it's, yeah, divided by the, it's the sensitivity divided by the specificity.
1 minus, 1 minus sensitivity, 1 minus 0.8 divided by the specificity, which is 0.2 divided by
0.94 or 0.21.
So here, the LR negative is 0.21.
And how do we interpret those numbers?
So the big broad rule is LR positive is greater than 5, or LR negatives less than 0.2 are
associated with pretty large shifts in your pre-test to post-test probability.
And this is kind of a little bit more fine or breakdown, and this is a table I would like you to learn.
So basically, for LR positives, you just kind of have in your head what a 2, a 5 or a 10 are associated with.
So initially, likelihood ratios are actually odds, but we're converting them to probabilities here,
because it's easier to interpret.
So an LR positive of 10 increases the probability of the condition after you, with a positive test, about 45%.
LR negative of 0.1 decreases the probability by about 45%.
We can see how that kind of works.
So this is bringing that all together.
This is a normogram.
All these calculations are kind of done on your phone now, but this kind of helps visualize it.
So our scenario is, young lady presents to you in the clinic.
She comes from a physician that, you know, sends you a certain kind of patient most of the time.
You know, she has some of the thing you've already kind of just done a brief history and talked to her.
She has some issues from her history, and the scenario suggests that she has a disruption of her ankle ligaments.
But not everything makes sense.
Not everything in the story is pointing in that direction.
So it's not a clear cut, yes, it's not a clear cut, no.
So we're going to do a diagnostic test to see if we can rule in or rule out that she has a ligament tear.
But so we pick a test, and I'm just going to say anterior drawer.
I don't remember if these numbers exactly line up with that, but for our purposes, for this.
And the published LR positive for that test is a 10.
Published LR negative is like a 0.3.
And so I haven't done the test yet, but I'm thinking some aspects of her story are saying yes, some are storing no, some are pointing no.
I think it's 50-50 whether she has a ligament tear.
I could go either way.
So that's my pretest probability, that 50%, that number that's in my head, based on my clinical experience.
I'm thinking there's a 50% chance she has this condition, this diagnosis.
So I'm going to do this test.
I do the test with her.
It comes back positive.
So I know that the LR positive for this test is a 10.
So it's going to increase my post-test probability by about 45, almost 50%.
So now, so I've done the test, it's positive.
And based on that LR positive value for that test, now I can be almost 95% sure she has a ligament tear.
Okay, that's how that works.
Okay, now we roll the tape back.
I haven't done the test yet.
I'm still kind of at that pretest probability, I think.
Okay, she's got about, there's about a 50-50 chance.
I do this test.
It has an LR negative of 0.3.
I do the test, it comes back, the test is negative for a ligament tear.
Now I can decrease my pretest probability by about 45%.
So now I'm thinking, oh, there's only, you know, there's a, you know, of a 0.3 is about 25%.
So now there's only, with that negative test, there's only about a 25% chance she has the condition.
So that's what these LR positives and LR negatives do.
They change, they tell us how much to change our pretest probability to once the results of the test are no.
Okay.
So here's another example.
So here's our two-by-two table for, this is the anterior drawer test.
So we can look at the, so the, those participants in this study on the, determine the diagnostic accuracy of this anterior drawer test, there were 90 plus 27 people who had a ligament rupture.
90 of them tested positive, were true positives.
27 of that, 117, I think, that have a true ligament disorder did not, tested negative, 27 tested negative.
So those are the false negatives because everybody in that sensitivity column has the condition.
And then of those people in that sample, 38 of them, 37 of them did not have a ligament rupture.
28 of that 37 had tested negative.
There were true negatives, but nine were positives.
There were nine false positives.
And so the sensitivity and specificity likelihood ratios are just calculated in a very straightforward manner.
